Causal relations are instances of natural laws. If x causes y, that is because there is some law of nature to the effect that things that, in some relevant respect, resemble x always bring about things that, in some relevant respect, are like y.
Causal relations typically involve sequences of events. But not all sequences of events are causal. When I bring my hands together quickly, a noise occurs—there is a clapping sound. That sequence of events is clearly causal in nature: the collision of my hands caused the sound to occur. But suppose that, just after I bring my hands together, one of you suddenly feels a tickle. That is not a causal sequence: it’s just a coincidence.
The natural law of which a given causal sequence is an instance is known as the covering law for that sequence.
To know a natural law is to know a fact about the spatiotemporal world. Natural laws are not in the same category as #: such laws are not of a strictly logical, philosophical, or mathematical nature. It is not possible to know of natural laws merely on the basis of conceptual analysis. Such knowledge can be acquired only through investigation of the spatiotemporal world. It is only through such investigation that one can know that the speed of light is 186,000 mph/second, that objects gain mass as they accelerate, that the force with which two bodies attract each other is proportional to their masses.
Of course, some natural laws strike us as extremely obvious. We find it obvious that unsupported objects fall. But that is not because such knowledge is analytic; it is only because the relevant spatiotemporal knowledge constantly forces itself upon us.
Even though knowledge of natural law is spatiotemporal knowledge, such knowledge tends to have a highly general character and is thus, in that respect, comparable to many cases of analytic knowledge (e.g., one’s knowledge of #). Knowledge of the laws of physics is very general knowledge. To know such laws is to know this or that specific fact, and is instead to know a fact about how events in general are interrelated.
But most spatiotemporal knowledge is highly specific. You know where you live; you know what toothpaste tastes like; you know where you parked your car; you know that Barack Obama is now the president. Such knowledge concerns matters of specific fact and not dependence-relations holding among facts in general.
It must be emphasized, however, that even though knowledge of natural law is general and is, from that viewpoint, similar to knowledge of logical or philosophical principles, knowledge of natural law is synthetic, whereas knowledge of logico-philosophical truths is analytic.
