     Sellars has shown that in non-standard conditions, one must rely (however unconsciously) on background knowledge if one is to learn, through one’s senses, how things are in the external world. But standard conditions are an idealization: no conditions are really standard. If there were perfectly ‘standard’ conditions, they would not be standard. If we could set up a situation that was distortion free, that situation would not be a typical one. So what Sellars says about Bob’s intake of color-facts in the tie-shop is true of our intake of color-facts in general. 
      Further, it is true of our intake of shape-facts, size-facts, distance-facts, and so on. We can tell at a glance what shape an object has. But the appearance that a diamond-shaped object gives off when looked at from above is the same as the appearance that a square shaped object gives off when looked at from an oblique angle. But we instantly know, except in contrived circumstances, whether an object is diamond-shaped or square shaped. We see that the object is (say) square. How can we see this, given that its appearance, considered by itself, could just as well be that of a diamond-shaped object? Because we take into account a great deal of contextual information; in particular, we take into account the fact that we are not hovering above the object. 
    A ten foot stop-sign, looked at from a hundred feet away, gives off the same appearance as 1,000 foot stop sign looked at from 10,000 feet away. But when one looks at a stop sign from a hundred feet away, one isn’t fooled for a second; one sees that it is a stop sign (of a certain approximate height); one isn’t fooled for a moment into thinking that it is 1000 ft stop-sign. (Of course, one cannot tell, just by looking at a stop-sign, exactly what height it is. But one is seldom off by orders of magnitude.) One can just see the approximate height of the stop sign. But how is this possible, given that a ten foot stop sign looked at from a hundred feet away gives off the same appearance as 1,000 ft stop-sign looked at from 10,000 ft away? Because one takes a great deal of contextual information into account. One compares the sign to the trees in its vicinity; and one knows, on independent grounds, that trees (at least outside of northern California) are usually between 15 and 80 ft tall: one can thus use these trees as benchmarks. And one uses various other benchmarks (e.g. houses that one sees, whose sizes and locations one knows one independent grounds) and, more generally, various other pieces of background or contextual knowledge. 
     By exactly analogous arguments, it can be shown that any episode of taking in information about the external world – any episode of taking in the height or speed or shape…or color  of an object – involves the co-operation of contextual or background information. Such ulterior knowledge is needed to give content to one’s sensory episodes. Otherwise those episodes are indeterminate. If the contextual information that we just spoke of is left out, one sensory episodes – one’s visual sensations – don’t tell one whether one is seeing a thousand foot object ten-thousand feet a way or a ten foot object a hundred feet away; they don’t tell one whether he is seeing a diamond or a square; an oval or a circle; a nearby object moving 3 mph or a distant one moving at 150,000 mph. In the absence of background empirical knowledge, our sensory episodes become indeterminate to the point of meaninglessness –  to the point of having no representational content. 
     It seems to me that this Sellarsian line of thought was put forth by Berkeley in 1709. We think we can simply see whether an object is ten feet away or a thousand feet away, whether it is oval or round. Of course, we do learn objects’ shapes, sizes, and so on, through perception, and through sight in particular. Berkeley doesn’t deny this for a second. But he says that when we take in the shape of an object through sight, that is only because a great deal of background knowledge is co-operating. 
       Berkeley begins by asking to us consider distance-perception. We think we see how far away objects are. Obviously, we can (up to a point) take in objects’ distances from us through sight. But one obviously cannot tell, just by looking at it, that the moon is this or that distance away (section 44). This is always true, in a very obvious way, of very distant objects. Given only one’s visual experience, one would have no idea whether the moon was a million light years away and very large, or a few miles away and very small. 
     Berkeley then says (correctly, in my view) that what is true of very distant objects is true, though less obviously, of not so distant objects. Given only what your eyes tell you – leaving aside background knowledge – do you really know that you are seeing a medium sized object fifty feet away or a massive object a mile away? What if you took a guess? What if you guessed that it was fifty feet away, but it took you half and hour to jog to that object? No matter how good your eyes are, and no matter how ‘standard’ are the conditions of perception, there is no reason why things couldn’t turn out that way. Your visual experience by itself is ambiguous between your seeing a massive object very far away and a medium sized object nearby. So you don’t really see how far away an object is. When you think you are doing that, you are really reading into your visual experience a lot of background empirical knowledge. 
     You know, for example, that objects of that particular shape (say, a stop-sign shape) are typically of such and such a height, and you use that information as a kind of benchmark. Given that background information, you can tell on the basis of your visual sensation that you are seeing an object that is less than a hundred feet away. But the visual sensation by itself is ambiguous between a nearby ten-foot tall stop-sign and a far-off hundred-foot stop-sign.
    Another example might help. The appearance given by of by a receding object is not different from the appearance given off by a shrinking gives. But when you see a person walk into the distance, you can see that he is not shrinking. How can you see this, given that the appearance in question could be that of a shrinking person? You know that people don’t shrink. You also know that if, by some miracle, a person were suddenly shrinking, he wouldn’t make the calm ambulatory motions made by the person you are seeing. Thus contextual information disambiguates what would otherwise be an ambiguous visual experience.
      According to Berkeley, what ultimately endows one’s visual sensations with information regarding the distances of objects is that different kinds of visual sensations have different kinds of kinesthetic and tactile concomitants. One reads these into one’s current visual sensations and it is this, in the final analysis, that gives your visual experiences the representational contents that they have. It is this that makes your current visual experience be one of (say) a man who is walking away as opposed to a man who is shrinking. 
   A different example might help. You see what you take to be a pencil lying ten feet away from you. But you find that it takes you half an hour to walk there. And once you are there, that ‘pencil’ gives off the appearance of a fallen (pencil-shaped) tree. Finally, you return back to your starting point. Obviously you will then ‘recalibrate’; you will use the knowledge that you just acquired  as a way of establishing the comparative distances of other objects.  It must be pointed out that you acquired knowledge of the distance of the pencil not merely through sight, but with the help of kinesthetic and tactile sensations, and also sensations of duration. As we just said, you use your knowledge of the distance (from your original starting point) of the pencil as a kind of reference point: that information helps you know the comparative distances of other objects you are seeing. So, ultimately, it is not the visual sensation by itself that apprises you of the distances of all these objects; it is your visual sensation  plus various sensations of motion, resistance, touch (your feet touching the ground), and duration. If it weren’t for these non-visual concomitants of your visual perceptions, you would have no idea how far objects were from you: for your visual sensations by themselves cannot give you this knowledge. 
   Berkeley’s basic point is that your visual experience by itself doesn’t apprise you of the size or distance of the object. What does that is your visual experience plus various pieces of background knowledge: 

   “[T] judgment we make of the distance of an object viewed with both eyes is entirely the result of experience. If we had not constantly found that certain sensations [accompanied our visual sensations], we would never make those sudden judgments from them concerning the distance of objects; no more than we would pretend to judge of a man’s thoughts by his pronouncing words we had never hear before.” (section 20) 

   Berkeley sometimes expresses this by saying that you simply don’t see distances at all  (section 46). This seems an overstatement. In some sense, surely, I can see that my pencil is less than 90 ft away. But there is a deep truth in these words of Berkeley’s. One’s visual experience, taken by itself,  stripped of any contextualization, doesn’t tell one that is one is seeing a tree-size pencil a half-mile off or a tiny pencil nearby. 
   Berkeley generalizes this point (sections 121-147). Consider the kind of appearance that a square object gives off when looked at 