1.0 Philosophy as the analysis of the categories in terms of which understand the world
We understand the world in terms of certain categories (e.g., person, statement, fact, impossibility, existence). Philosophy studies these categories. It delineates their structures. This is its sole function. Thus, philosophy is the discipline that delineates the structures of the categories in terms of which we think about the world.
We’ve already identified some of these categories. By stating a few of our most basic beliefs, we can identify some more (they’re the ones denoted by the italicized expressions):

The world isn’t homogeneous. It is articulated into events bearing various causal and, more generally, spatiotemporal relations to one another. Many of these events involve more or less persistent things (rocks, trees, etc.). Some of these things have minds. Most animate (mind-having) beings have sense-perceptions; i.e., they see things, hear things, etc. Most percipient (perception-having) creatures have beliefs. Some of these beliefs are true; others are false. Some of the true ones are cases of knowledge. Some percipient creatures communicate with one another through the use of language. Mastery of a language makes it easier for one to communicate one’s beliefs to others, and it also enhances one’s ability to reason. Rational (reason-capable) creatures tend to make value-judgments. They judge one another’s actions, and sometimes their own, to be good or bad. Creatures that make such judgments tend to regulate their behavior towards one another by means of systems of law, the supposed purpose of which is to ensure that such behavior satisfy the requirements of justice.
1.1 Knowledge vs. meta-knowledge
Event, space, time, cause, persistence, thing, mind, perception, belief, knowledge, language, truth, value-judgment, law, justice. Whatever we know, we know it through these categories (and others like them—the list is not complete). But even though we cannot think without them, they are seldom the objects of thought. The result is that, although we’re adept at using them, we know little about them.
For example, we are excellent at distinguishing linguistic from non-linguistic behavior, which suggests that, at some level, we know what conditions a creature’s behavior must meet if it is to embody knowledge of a language. But when asked to make these conditions explicit, we find we can do so only with great difficulty and only with partial success. So even though we are good at knowing who knows a language and who does not, we don’t know what it is that we know by virtue of knowing this.
The same thing mutatis mutandis  is true of each one of these categories. We’re excellent at distinguishing between moral and immoral behavior. We know that rape is immoral and that donating money to charity (for selfless reasons) is moral. But when asked to identify the principles embodied in these pedestrian and uncontroversial judgments, we have trouble producing theories that don’t distort them.
In general, it’s hard to identify the principles that guide our thoughts. Self-understanding isn’t the mind’s primary function. Nor could it be. The idea of a mind that thinks about nothing other than itself is an incoherent  one. Thus, any case of self-awareness, and therefore of self-understanding, is necessarily derivative of, and for that reason of lesser quality than, some other more fundamental sort of understanding.
 
Being the discipline whose purpose is to delineate the structures of these categories, philosophy has the very non-trivial job of identifying, in as clear and explicit a manner as possible, the conditions that a given thing must satisfy if it is to fall into a given one of these categories. So far as philosophy succeeds in this endeavor, it makes it clear what it is that we are doing when we are doing anything cognitive, be it making an observation or engaging in an extended piece of abstract reasoning. Philosophy is the analysis of the preconditions of all knowledge. It is the analysis of analysis, the logic of logic, the science of science.
1.2 The relationship of philosophy to other disciplines
The philosopher is interested in the laws governing the laws. He doesn’t want to know what in fact holds. He wants to know what it would even make sense to claim to hold. He wants to know the laws that the laws can’t break.
Philosophical knowledge is metaknowledge—knowledge about knowledge. The non-philosopher wants to know specifics. What happened? When did it happen? What did it cause? How did it cause it? The philosopher is interested in these questions only to the extent that knowing the answers to them helps him understand the categories (cause, place, time, etc.) underlying such knowledge.
The stranded motorist wants his car to work. He doesn’t care what will get it to do so. The engineer is interested in this. But the engineer is not entirely innocent of the motorist’s epistemic parochialism. The engineer has no interest in what the laws of physics are except in so far as he must know them to create the right mechanisms. But the physicist wants knowledge of the mechanisms only to the extent it will give him knowledge of the laws embodied therein. 
The philosopher is to the physicist what the physicist is to the engineer and, therefore, what the engineer is to the stranded motorist. The philosopher wants to know what causes what and what mechanisms were involved only to the extent that knowing this helps him understand what it is for one thing to cause another— only, that is to say, in so far as it helps him know what it is that one knows in knowing that one thing made another happen.
1.3 How is analytic philosophy different from non-analytic philosophy?
John Stuart Mill (1806–1873), the great philosopher and economist, said that he was an expert in but one science, that being the science of science. What he meant was obviously similar to what we’ve been saying. And it was similar, therefore, to what Gottlob Frege (1848–1925), the great philosopher and mathematical logician, meant when he said that logic studies not the laws of nature but the “laws of the laws of nature.” Whether Frege was right depends on what exactly one means by “logic.” But if, by “logic,” he meant “philosophy,” then Frege’s dictum was spot-on.
Frege is often described as the first analytic philosopher. Michael Dummett (1925–), an exceptionally capable contemporary philosopher of language, said that “analytic philosophy is post-Fregean philosophy.”  What does Dummett mean?
With some exceptions, pre-Fregean philosophers thought they were studying the most general features of the actual world. They thought that, like the botanist, they were in the business of saying how the world is, the only difference between their work and the botanist’s being that theirs is concerned with more general features of reality than the botanist’s.
Frege showed that this is wrong. Any interest that botanists have in plants that might exist, but don’t, is subordinate to their interest in what plants actually exist. Like all scientists, they are interested in what there could be only to the extent that it helps them figure out what there is. But with philosophers, it’s the other way around. Any interest they have in the actual is subordinate to their interest in the possible.
