One of Kant’s main objectives is to show that there are necessary connections among the events that we experience. Hume said that there are sequences and regularities of events, but that there is never any kind of internal connection holding among them. For event x to cause event y is just for the sequence consisting of x followed by y to instantiate a general regularity.
         Hume’s analysis is counter-intuitive. It very much seems that pushing the button makes the computer turn on, that flipping the switch makes the light turn on. Understandably, Kant wanted to do justice to that intuition. He tries to justify this intuition with a transcendental argument. (Here I will give a transcendental argument for that view; whether it is Kant’s own argument, or even one he would consider credible, is an exegetical question I wish to avoid.) 
          Imagine a world where there is no causation, where there are merely sequences of events. Such a world would comprise nothing enduring. This is because persistence is itself a causal notion. If something persists, there is ipso facto a causal sequence of some kind. So where there is no causation, there is no persistence. Where there is no persistence, there is no coherent ideation. For surely, as a matter of necessity, a coherent thought process involves some kind of persistence. So given only the fact that there are beings who have the ability to raise questions about anything, let alone about the necessary preconditions for experience, it follows that causal relations do not consist in mere sequences of events, but in internal relations of some kind.  
        But notice that this transcendental argument turns on the existence of entirely analytic connections among propositions; no “synthetic a priori” is involved. Given the very concept of a rational thought process, it follows that analytically there are causal relations among events. The analyticity in question is hard analyticity, but it is analyticity no less. In the next section, I will attempt to show that Kant-style transcendental arguments are capable of settling some important questions concerning scientific explanation and knowledge in general. 
